---
layout: default
title: Silent Bartleby, Silent Cicero
date: 2025-12-22
---
# Silent Bartleby, Silent Cicero

“Bartleby, the Scrivener” tells a story of a mysterious employee named Bartleby, who perplexes his employer, the lawyer-narrator, with a series of uncommon conduct, including refusing to work, dwelling in the workplace, and haunting the whole office building even after the narrator moves away from there. Bartleby seems to bear some magical power which enables him to paralyze the narrator with a simple phrase “I would prefer not to.” The words are far from rhetorical, but they nonetheless have the capacity to “unman” the narrator, as he states, and makes him puzzle over the justification of the “perfectly reasonable” refusal that he can never name (Melville 1169, 1167). He even can’t help but feel “a fraternal melancholy” toward him (1169). He constantly feels powerless when confronted by the refusal, saying “there was something about Bartleby that not only strangely disarmed me, but in a wonderful manner touched and disconcerted me” (1165).

Irving Adler argued in his work “Equity, Law and Bartleby” that the central theme of the story is “Natural Rights vs. Property Rights sanctified by law,” and the story proves that “natural rights would once again be the loser” following the abolishment of The Court of Chancery, which position the narrator had once taken and whose initial purpose was “providing remedies based on natural rights” (468, 469). He later gave several instances of Bartleby’s deeds and proved them to be the natural rights of humanity, including his refusal to work and residence in the office (470, 471). While his analysis on the connection between Bartleby’s deeds and natural rights are insightful, his judgement on which party actually wins is debatable. That Bartleby in the end dies in the Tomb is a hard fact, but throughout the whole story, his behavior and manners serve as a living debate against the institution, and it is also clear that the narrator is completely defeated by him. Melville actually hinted his readers at the reason behind a series of bizarre feelings and the defeats of the narrator: The narrator is not actually debating with Bartleby, but his respected Cicero. Bartleby’s noncompliance coincides with the great orator’s belief in Natural Law. Marcus Tullius Cicero, the bust of whom sits in the office, directly behind the narrator’s seat, was a lawyer and orator in the Rome Republic, and was a keen advocate of Natural Law, the law derived from the perfect reason of all human beings, transcending time and space, remaining valid for all humanity, and surpassing Civil Law, the law set up by the governor. Being an admirer of Cicero and likely reading through all of his works, the narrator is struck speechless upon finding out that Bartleby almost embodies the spirit of the orator. Bartleby is the speaker for Cicero and wins the debate over the superior rights of humanity.

Cicero was a faithful believer of _ius naturale_, which can be translated into English as Natural Law. Natural Law, according to Cicero, is the law derived purely from _recta ratio_ (right reason) of divinity, and is innate to all humanity to be “consonant with nature” (71). People possess a full understanding of the law without any education in jurisprudence, since it can be acquired merely by reason, which is granted to everyone by gods. Fernando H. Llano Alonso explains the source of the knowledge is “not some objective reality outside of man, but rather inherent to him, forming part of his essential rationality” (161). Anything that is in harmony with Nature and in accordance with morality falls into this category. Natural Law precedes all the established laws in society and can be applied to all nations throughout history, in contrast to _ius civile_, namely Civil Law, which is created by the governor and is only followed by citizens in a certain period or a certain nation. As Cicero put it in his political treatise _On the Commonwealth_: “There will not be one law at Rome and another at Athens, one now and another later, but all nations at all times will be bound by this one eternal and unchangeable law” (71). The law of universal morality is the main argument of Bartleby’s refusal, for his preference is protected by it, and should be considered superior to the human-established institution in the workplace. As Adler stated in his analysis of the story: “Melville’s purpose in telling this part of the story is to . . . question whether these assumptions \[of institutions in the workplace\] are eternally valid,” and he pointed out the relationship in office was a relatively new concept in the U.S. during that time, and with the new institution “more and more people ceased to be able to act on their preference” (470). Bartleby’s disobedience is an inquiry to the narrator about the validity of Cicero’s support of his natural right, and whether he should be regulated by the convention in the workplace.

It is no doubt that the lawyer-narrator, who runs most of his business by taking charge of real estates for the rich, will favor Cicero, who endorsed property rights and was a lawyer himself. That is also why he puts a bust of Cicero in his office, and it is fair for people to believe that he must have read and understood Cicero’s treatises thoroughly. In the story, twice the bust of Cicero in the narrator’s office is mentioned, and both of the times the narrator links it with Bartleby. When faced with Bartleby’s unexpected refusal the first time, the narrator explains that he would have cast him out of the office if there had been “anything ordinarily human” about him (Melville 1164). His lack of “uneasiness, anger, impatience or impertinence” makes him reminiscent of the inanimate bust of Cicero (1164). Although the narrator persuades himself, as well as the readers, that it is because of the strangeness of Bartleby that prevents him from dismissing Bartleby at once, subconsciously it is because the narrator finds some similarities between Bartleby and the Roman orator, and Bartleby’s claim of his natural rights, which Cicero also stressed, makes him speechless. The second time is in the next morning after the narrator finds out Bartleby’s residence in his office. When he confronts Bartleby, he finds Bartleby’s glance “fixed upon \[the narrator’s\] bust of Cicero” (1171). This discovery again makes manifest the connection between Bartleby and Cicero. Gradually realizing the unbreakable reason behind Bartleby’s rejection, though maybe just implicitly, the narrator starts to lose the high ground in the debates. He can’t provide a solid reason to retort Bartley’s _recta ratio_, and conceal his uncanny feelings with self-comfort. As the narrator surrenders to the seemingly unreasonable Bartleby, the readers start to suspect the true reason behind, and discover the inversion in the power relationship between the two. In the beginning, when the narrator describes himself as “burned to be rebelled against,” he still retains the power as an employer who sees his employee’s refusal as rebellion (1167). However, later in the story, he becomes the one who _rebels_ against his worker by referring to his retreat from the occupied office on Sunday morning as an “impotent rebellion against the mild effrontery” (1169). Deep in the narrator’s heart he knows that his defeat is doomed.

Also, the strange feeling arousing in the narrator’s heart, which he refers to as “charity,” is actually the irresistible intimacy that grows in his mind as the response to the Natural Law, which, of course, couldn’t have occurred if he hasn’t read Cicero. In _On the Laws_, Cicero states the shared knowledge of Natural Law and _recta ratio_ make a person “loves himself no more than the other,” and therefore “all people are bound by a sort of natural goodwill and benevolence as well as by the bound of justice” (117-118). This is the spring of the narrator’s brotherly love for Bartleby. As a man well-learned in Cicero, he can’t help but think of Cicero’s humanistic ideas. The desire to befriend and the sudden feeling that both of them are “sons of Adam” are the results of his profound understanding of Cicero’s works. He even pronounces explicitly that “\[t\]he bond of a common humanity now drew me irresistibly to gloom” (1169). It is the sound comprehension of Cicero’s thoughts and great sympathy with his values of the fellowship of humanity that drive him to have this enigmatic, uncommon compassion toward Bartleby spontaneously.

Although Cicero did also protest property rights and claim that people have the right to their own premises, the narrator understands the limit of his thesis, and thus still fails to cast Bartleby out of his office. In _On Duties_ Cicero spoke out for property rights despise the absence of Natural Law. He claimed that, instead of Natural Law, it is “owing to long-standing of occupancy . . . or to victory . . . or to law, agreement, contract, or lot” that people obtain the rights to a property (30). It may seem that this can be of help to the narrator with his retort to Bartleby’s illegitimate occupation of his premises, but immediately following the passage Cicero again expressed his favor to the even greater merit of humanity: “\[W\]e re not born for ourselves alone . . . \[but\] for the sake of other human beings, so as to benefit one another. In this we ought to follow nature as a guide and make common utilities commonly available, such as in reciprocating appropriate actions, . . . and thereby more closely unite human beings in association” (30). With this proviso, and concerned with Bartleby’s condition of total isolation from the community, the narrator cannot act against his conscience and the teaching of Cicero to force him to leave the office, even if he legally owns the rights to the property. Again, his deep understanding of Cicero paralyzes him from getting rid of Bartleby, for Bartleby performs all the rights that Cicero deemed more important than the narrator’s.

In conclusion, throughout the whole story, Bartleby almost becomes the representative of Cicero, and speaks on behalf of him, protesting against the society in which the institution usurped Natural Law and depreciated the basic human rights in the wake of the Industrial Revolution. His silence, just as the silence of the bust of Cicero in the office practicing law, becomes the most powerful inquiry to the narrator, and disables him from further implement of casting Bartleby out of the premise. Moreover, his silent proclamation of his natural right kindles the narrator’s sense of fraternity, reminding him of Cicero’s firmest faith of the _recta ratio_ that all human beings share. The eloquent orator exclaims his belief through Bartleby’s “I would prefer not to,” which suffices to justify his rejection to the oppression of human rights. With full comprehension of Cicero’s ideas, the narrator understands the laws of property rights, at which he excels, and every established law cannot invalidate Bartleby’s declaration of his rights, hence his surrender to Bartleby. Bartleby dies eventually, but the narrator hasn’t once won over him in the debate Bartleby holds with his whole life, and this totally changes the narrator. Bartleby, just like Cicero, may have been dead, but he passes on something immortal, wins all the debates, and the philosophy persists. Melville didn’t delicately mentioned Cicero’s philosophy in the story, but through the interaction between the two main characters and Bartleby’s omnipotent pet phrase, the great orator’s ideas have already permeated the whole story, just as his bust, which may not always be visible, but is always there.

Works Cited

Adler, Irving. “Equity, Law and Bartleby.” _Science & Society_, vol. 51, no. 4, 1987, pp. 468–74. _JSTOR_, www.jstor.org/stable/40402834.

Alonso, Fernando H. Llano. “Cicero and Natural Law.” _ARSP: Archiv Für Rechts- Und Sozialphilosophie / Archives for Philosophy of Law and Social Philosophy_, vol. 98, no. 2, 2012, pp. 157–68. _JSTOR_, www.jstor.org/stable/24769084.

Cicero, Marcus Tullius. _Cicero: On the Commonwealth and On the Laws_. Edited by James E. G. Zetzel, Cambridge UP, 1999.

---. _On Duties_. Translated by Benjamin Patrick Newton, Cornell UP, 2016.

Melville, Herman. “Bartleby, the Scrivener.” _The Norton Anthology of American Literature,_ Edited by Robert S. Levine, shorter 9th ed., vol. 1, W. W. Norton, 2017, pp. 1157-83.